Version 1.0.0
=============

Initial release of the BESSER Modeling Agent -- the conversational AI backend for the
`BESSER Web Modeling Editor <https://editor.besser-pearl.org>`_.

The agent interprets natural-language requests over WebSocket and returns structured
diagram JSON payloads that the frontend renders as visual diagrams.

Highlights
----------

- **4 diagram types**: Class, Object, State Machine, and Agent.
- **Natural-language diagram creation**: single elements or complete systems from a description.
- **Model modification** for Class diagrams.
- **UML specification Q&A** via retrieval-augmented generation (RAG).
- **Built on BESSER Agentic Framework (BAF)** v4.2.0.

Diagram Types
-------------

**Class Diagram**
- Create single classes with attributes, methods, and visibility modifiers (``+``, ``-``, ``#``, ``~``).
- Generate complete multi-class systems with relationships (Association, Composition, Aggregation, Inheritance, Realization).
- Modify existing diagrams: rename classes, add attributes, add relationships.
- Multiplicity and method parameter support.
- Deterministic fallback generation when LLM fails.

**Object Diagram**
- Create object instances with slot values.
- Reference existing class diagrams to use exact class and attribute IDs.
- Populate objects with realistic example values.

**State Machine Diagram**
- Create individual states or full state machines.
- Support for simple, initial, final, and choice states.
- Transitions with triggers, guards, and effects.

**Agent Diagram**
- Create agent states, intents, transitions, and configurations.
- Extensive normalization of agent specifications (states, intents, replies, transitions).
- Modify existing agent models.

Capabilities
------------

**Natural-Language Diagram Creation**
- Single element creation: create one class, one state, one object, etc.
- Complete system generation: describe a system (e.g., "library management system") and get a full multi-element diagram.
- Diagram type detection from keywords when not explicitly specified.

**UML Specification Q&A (RAG)**
- Retrieval-augmented generation over the official UML 2.5 specification (``formal-17-12-05.pdf``).
- ChromaDB vector store with OpenAI embeddings, persisted to ``uml_vector_store/``.
- Recursive character text splitting (chunk size 1000, overlap 100), retrieves top 4 chunks per query.
- Falls back to direct LLM response if RAG is uninitialized.

**Modeling Help**
- General UML modeling advice via LLM.
- Separate from RAG -- provides conceptual guidance rather than spec-based answers.

Architecture
------------

**Agent State Machine** (7 states):

- ``greetings_state`` (initial) -- greets user, tracks ``has_greeted`` to avoid re-greeting.
- ``create_single_element_state`` -- creates a single UML element via diagram handler.
- ``create_complete_system_state`` -- generates complete multi-element systems.
- ``modify_model_state`` -- modifies existing model elements.
- ``modeling_help_state`` -- provides UML modeling advice.
- ``clarify_diagram_type_state`` -- asks user to clarify when diagram type is ambiguous.
- ``uml_rag_state`` -- answers UML specification questions using RAG.

All states have unified transitions supporting both text and JSON events (``ReceiveJSONEvent``), with every state able to transition to any other based on intent matching.

**Intent Classification** (6 intents, LLM-based):

- ``hello_intent`` -- greeting/conversation start.
- ``create_single_element_intent`` -- create exactly one UML element.
- ``create_complete_system_intent`` -- create complete system/multiple elements.
- ``modify_model_intent`` -- modify/update/connect existing elements.
- ``modeling_help_intent`` -- help with UML modeling concepts.
- ``uml_spec_intent`` -- theoretical UML specification queries.

Uses ``LLMIntentClassifierConfiguration`` with ``use_intent_descriptions=True`` (description-based LLM classification, no training sentences).

**Diagram Handler Architecture**:

- ``BaseDiagramHandler`` (92 lines) -- abstract base class defining the handler interface.
- ``DiagramHandlerFactory`` -- creates handlers by diagram type with metadata.
- ``utils.py`` -- message parsing and keyword detection utilities.
- 4 concrete handlers: ClassDiagramHandler (449 lines), AgentDiagramHandler (790 lines), ObjectDiagramHandler (200 lines), StateMachineHandler (197 lines).

**Communication Protocol**:

- WebSocket JSON input with ``message``, ``diagramType``, ``currentModel``, optional ``referenceDiagramData``.
- Message prefix parsing: ``[DIAGRAM_TYPE:ClassDiagram]`` stripped and routed.
- Output actions: ``inject_element``, ``inject_complete_system``, ``modify_model``.

Tech Stack
----------

- **Runtime**: Python 3.11+, WebSocket server (port 8765)
- **Agent Framework**: BESSER Agentic Framework (BAF) v4.2.0
- **LLM**: OpenAI GPT-4o-mini (temperature 0.4, max_tokens 3000)
- **RAG**: LangChain + ChromaDB + OpenAI Embeddings over UML 2.5 specification
- **Deployment**: Docker with health check, auto-generates ``config.ini`` from environment variables

Testing
-------

3 test files with full BESSER framework stubs (tests run without OpenAI keys):

- ``test_class_diagram_handler.py`` -- class generation tests.
- ``test_payload_and_routing.py`` -- integration tests for JSON/text routing.
- ``test_workflow_scenarios.py`` -- end-to-end workflow tests.
