Version 2.0.0
=============

Major upgrade of the BESSER Modeling Agent with 2 new diagram types, a complete architecture
overhaul, and numerous new capabilities including voice input, file conversion, code generation
triggering, multi-step orchestration, and a deterministic layout engine.

Highlights
----------

- **6 diagram types** (up from 4): added GUI No-Code and Quantum Circuit.
- **Voice input** via OpenAI Whisper speech-to-text.
- **File conversion** from PlantUML, RDF/OWL/TTL, images, and PDFs into diagrams.
- **Code generation** triggering for 15+ BESSER generators directly from conversation.
- **Multi-step orchestration** decomposes compound requests across diagram types and generators.
- **Deterministic layout engine** with collision avoidance replaces random positioning.
- **Model modification** expanded from Class-only to all 6 diagram types.
- **Complete architecture restructure** into modular ``src/`` package.

New Diagram Types
-----------------

**GUI No-Code Diagram**
- Create screens with metric cards, action buttons, charts, and navigation headers.
- Dashboard widgets: BarChart, LineChart, PieChart, RadarChart, RadialBarChart, Map, MetricCard, Table.
- Sample data generation for chart components.
- Full creation and modification support.

**Quantum Circuit Diagram**
- Create quantum circuits with gates and qubits.
- Support for common gate types (H, X, Y, Z, CNOT, etc.).
- Qubit management and circuit layout.
- Full creation and modification support.

New Capabilities
----------------

**Voice Input**
- OpenAI Whisper (``whisper-1``) speech-to-text integration.
- Users can send voice messages in the web editor chat; the agent transcribes and processes them.

**File Conversion**
- File conversion handler supporting multiple input formats.
- **PlantUML**: ``.puml`` files converted to Class Diagram JSON.
- **Knowledge Graphs**: RDF, OWL, and TTL files converted to Class Diagram JSON.
- **Images**: Uploaded images analyzed and converted to diagram specifications.
- **PDFs**: Text extracted (via PyMuPDF) and interpreted as modeling requests.
- **Generic text**: Plain text files processed as natural-language diagram descriptions.

**Code Generation Triggering**
- Trigger any of 15+ BESSER generators from the conversation.
- Supported generators: Django, FastAPI (Backend), WebApp, SQL, SQLAlchemy, Python, Java, Pydantic, JSON Schema, SmartData, Agent (BAF), Qiskit, JSON Object, and more.
- Keyword-based generator detection from natural-language requests.
- Automatic prerequisite checking (e.g., WebApp requires both ClassDiagram and GUINoCodeDiagram).
- Also supports: export to JSON/BUML and deploy to Render.

**Multi-Step Orchestration**
- Workspace orchestrator dispatches operations across diagram types.
- Request planner segments compound requests into sequential operation groups.
- Example: "create a library system and then generate Django code" becomes two operations -- model creation followed by code generation.
- Parallel-safe grouping for independent operations.

**Deterministic Layout Engine**
- Replaces the original random offset positioning from v1.0.0.
- Collision avoidance against existing canvas elements.
- Relationship-aware grouping places connected elements nearby.
- Per-diagram-type sizing constants for optimal spacing.
- Canvas expansion for large diagrams.

**Conversation Memory**
- Sliding-window memory retains recent conversation turns per session.
- Optional LLM summarization compresses older context to stay within token budgets.
- Per-session isolation.

**Context-Aware Suggestions**
- After each action, the agent suggests relevant next steps.
- Suggestions based on current project state (which diagrams exist, what was just done).
- Examples: "Generate Python code", "Add a relationship", "Create a State Machine".

**Confirmation Flows**
- When creating a system on a diagram that already has elements, the agent prompts the user.
- Options: replace existing elements, keep alongside, or create in a new tab (up to 5 tabs per type).

**Describe Diagram**
- New intent to explain what's currently on the canvas.
- Provides a natural-language summary of the diagram's contents.

**Token and Cost Tracking**
- Thread-safe per-session and global tracking of LLM token usage.
- Cost estimation based on model pricing.

Enhanced Existing Capabilities
------------------------------

**Model Modification**
- Expanded from Class Diagram only (v1.0.0) to all 6 diagram types.
- Base handler now provides full modification support (1,434 lines, up from 92).

**Intent Recognition**
- Overhauled from basic LLM classification to pattern-based cross-validation.
- 9 intents (up from 6): added ``generation_intent``, ``describe_model_intent``, ``workflow_intent``.

**Diagram Handlers**
- All existing handlers (Class, Object, State Machine, Agent) significantly expanded with richer prompts, better normalization, and full modification support.
- Pydantic-enforced structured outputs for all diagram types eliminate manual JSON parsing.
- Domain pattern library with pre-built templates for common system types (e-commerce, library, etc.).

Architecture
------------

**Complete restructure** from flat files into modular ``src/`` package:

- ``src/diagram_handlers/``: Per-diagram-type handlers with factory/registry pattern.

  - ``core/base_handler.py``: Abstract base handler (1,434 lines, up from 92 in v1.0.0).
  - ``core/layout_engine.py``: Deterministic positioning engine.
  - ``types/``: 6 concrete diagram handlers.

- ``src/execution/``: Operation execution (planning, model operations, file handling, progress feedback).
- ``src/handlers/``: Generation handler, file conversion handler, validation handler.
- ``src/orchestrator/``: Workspace orchestrator and request planner.
- ``src/memory/``: Sliding-window conversation memory.
- ``src/tracking/``: Token usage and cost tracking.
- ``src/protocol/``: WebSocket protocol v2.0 request parsing.
- ``src/routing/``: Intent definitions and classification.
- ``src/schemas/``: Pydantic models with ``max_length`` constraints and ``Literal`` types for all 6 diagram types.
- ``src/llm/``: LLM provider abstraction (predict, structured parse, streaming).
- ``src/utilities/``: Shared utility functions.

**Agent State Machine** (built on BAF v4.3.1, up from v4.2.0):

- ``greetings_state`` (initial)
- ``create_complete_system_state``
- ``modify_model_state``
- ``modeling_help_state``
- ``describe_model_state`` (new)
- ``uml_rag_state``
- ``generation_state`` (new)
- ``workflow_state`` (new -- end-to-end: model + validate + generate)

Tech Stack Changes
------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 35 35

   * - Component
     - v1.0.0
     - v2.0.0
   * - Python
     - 3.11+
     - 3.10+
   * - BAF
     - v4.2.0
     - v4.3.1
   * - LLM
     - GPT-4o-mini (temp 0.4, 3K tokens)
     - gpt-4.1-mini (temp 0.2, 8K tokens)
   * - Structured output
     - Manual JSON prompting
     - Pydantic via ``beta.chat.completions.parse``
   * - Speech
     - --
     - OpenAI Whisper (``whisper-1``)
   * - Layout
     - Random offset positioning
     - Deterministic engine with collision avoidance

Testing
-------

16 test files (up from 3 in v1.0.0) covering:

- Diagram handlers (all 6 types) and base handler
- Pydantic schemas for all diagram types
- Conversation memory and LLM provider
- Token tracking and cost estimation
- File conversion and generation handler
- Protocol parsing and request planner
- Workspace orchestrator
- Suggestions engine and confirmation flows
- GUI chart generation and model helpers

Breaking Changes
----------------

- **Architecture**: Flat file structure replaced by ``src/`` package. All imports changed.
- **Protocol**: WebSocket protocol upgraded to v2.0 with ``AssistantRequest`` dataclass. Clients must support ``workspace`` and ``widget`` modes.
- **LLM model**: Changed from GPT-4o-mini to gpt-4.1-mini with different temperature and token settings.
- **BAF version**: Upgraded from v4.2.0 to v4.3.1.
- **Configuration**: ``config.ini`` replaced by ``config.yaml``.
